Move Promscale remote-write from Promscale repo (#1409)
timescale/docs: promscale/send-data/remote-write.md

# Write data to Promscale using the remote-write API

Promscale provides a remote-write endpoint for ingesting data. The endpoint is
compatible with Prometheus. You can also push data to Promscale from a custom
application.

To configure Prometheus for remote writing to Promscale, see the section on

> [writing from Prometheus][write-prometheus]. To use the remote-write endpoint
> with a custom application, see the following sections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[writing from Prometheus][write-prometheus]. This section covers how to 
use the remote-write endpoint with a custom application.
```

## Overview of remote-write endpoint

The remote-write endpoint is located at `http://<PROMSCALE_URL>:<PORT>/write`.
The URL and port depend on your configuration. For example, if you're running
locally on the default port, the endpoint is located at
`http://localhost:9201/write`.

Only the HTTP POST method is supported.

The default data format is Protobuf, but JSON streaming and text are also
supported.

> For more information on endpoint details, see the [Prometheus
> documentation][prometheus-remote-storage].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on endpoint details, see the 
[Prometheus documentation][prometheus-remote-storage].
```

## Formats

This section covers formats for sending data to the Promscale endpoint,
including:

*   [General format for time-series data][general-format]
*   [Protobuf format][protobuf-format]
*   [JSON streaming format][json-format]
*   [Prometheus and OpenMetric text format][text-format]

## General format for time-series data

> A time series must contain both labels and samples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Prometheus time series must contain both labels and samples.
```

Labels are a collection of label name/value pairs with unique label names. Every
request must contain a label named `__name__` which cannot have an empty value.
All other labels are optional metadata.

A sample must contain two things:

*   An integer timestamp in milliseconds since the UNIX epoch. In other words,
    the number of milliseconds since `1970-01-01 00:00:00 UTC`, excluding leap
    seconds. This should be represented as required by Go's [ParseInt][parseint]
    function.
*   A floating point number that represents the actual measured value.

## Protobuf format

> Protobuf is the default data format. It is slightly more complex than the [JSON
> streaming format][json-format], but it is usually more performant, because the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Protobuf is the default data format. It is slightly more complex than the 
[JSON streaming format][json-format], but it is usually more performant, because the
```

payload is smaller. We recommend this format if you're building a system to
ingest a lot of data continuously.

<procedure>

### Using the Promscale endpoint with the Protobuf format

> 1.  Fetch the protocol buffer definition files [from the Prometheus GitHub
>     repo][protobuf-definition].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Fetch the protocol buffer definition files 
    [from the Prometheus GitHub repository][protobuf-definition].
```

1.  Compile the definitions into the structures of the programming language

>     you're using. For instructions, see the [Google Protobuf
>     tutorials][protobuf-tutorials].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    you're using. For instructions, see the 
    [Google Protobuf tutorials][protobuf-tutorials].
```

1.  Use the structures to construct requests to send to the Promscale write

>     endpoint. For more information, see [a sample request written in
>     Go][go-sample].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    endpoint. For more information, see 
    [this sample request written in Go][go-sample].
```

</procedure>

### Protobuf example in Go

Before you begin, you need the Protobuf definition files, available in the
Prometheus codebase. These definitions must be compiled into the necessary
classes for payload serialization.

Since Prometheus is written in the Go language, you can directly import the

> pre-generated classes from the [prompb] package in the Prometheus repository.

Reviewer: missing link ref?

Author: ```suggestion
pre-generated classes from the [prompb][prompb] package in the Prometheus repository.
```

                        Value: "foo",
                    },
                },
                Samples: []Sample{
                    {
                        Timestamp: 1577836800000,
                        Value:     100.0,
                    },
                },
            },
        },
    }
    // Marshal the data into a byte slice using the protobuf library.
    data, err := proto.Marshal(wr)
    if err != nil {
        panic(err)
    }
    // Encode the content into snappy encoding.
    encoded := snappy.Encode(nil, data)
    body := bytes.NewReader(encoded)
    // Create an HTTP request from the body content and set necessary parameters.
    req, err := http.NewRequest("POST", "http://localhost:9201/write", body)
    if err != nil {
        panic(err)
    }
    // Set the required HTTP header content.
    req.Header.Set("Content-Type", "application/x-protobuf")
    req.Header.Set("Content-Encoding", "snappy")
    req.Header.Set("X-Prometheus-Remote-Write-Version", "0.1.0")
    // Send request to Promscale.
    resp, err := http.DefaultClient.Do(req)
    if err != nil {
        panic(err)
    }
    defer resp.Body.Close()
    ...
```

## JSON streaming format

> 

Reviewer: Not sure if it's GH's diff, or if there's a non-printing char or something breaking this.

The JSON streaming format makes it easier to ingest metric data from third-party
tools. It was introduced in Promscale and is not part of the Prometheus
`remote-write` specification. JSON streaming is slightly less efficient than
Protobuf.

This format uses a JSON stream of objects with two fields:

*   `labels`: A JSON object in which all the labels are represented as fields
*   `samples`: A JSON array which contains arrays of timestamp-value sets

A simple payload looks like this:

```json
{
    "labels":{"__name__": "cpu_usage", "namespace":"dev", "node": "brain"},
    "samples":[
        [1577836800000, 100],
        [1577836801000, 99],
        [1577836802000, 98],
        ...
    ]
}
{
    "labels":{"__name__": "cpu_usage", "namespace":"prod", "node": "brain"},
    "samples":[
        [1577836800000, 98],
        [1577836801000, 99],
        [1577836802000, 100],
        ...
    ]
}
...
```

In the `labels` object, fields represent the label name. Field values contain
the label value.

> The `samples` array must be in the following format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `samples` array must be in this format:
```

http_requests_total{method="post",code="400"}    3 1395066363000
# A histogram, which has a pretty complex representation in the text format:
# HELP http_request_duration_seconds A histogram of the request duration.
# TYPE http_request_duration_seconds histogram
http_request_duration_seconds_bucket{le="0.05"} 24054
http_request_duration_seconds_bucket{le="0.1"} 33444
http_request_duration_seconds_bucket{le="0.2"} 100392
http_request_duration_seconds_bucket{le="0.5"} 129389
http_request_duration_seconds_bucket{le="1"} 133988
http_request_duration_seconds_bucket{le="+Inf"} 144320
http_request_duration_seconds_sum 53423
http_request_duration_seconds_count 144320
...
```

Each sample entry is a single line in this format:

*   Metric name
*   **OPTIONAL** Collection label name and value, in curly braces, immediately
    following the metric name
*   Floating point number that represents the actual measured value
*   **OPTIONAL** An integer timestamp in milliseconds since the UNIX epoch. In
    other words, the number of milliseconds since `1970-01-01 00:00:00 UTC`,
    excluding leap seconds. This should be represented as required by Go's
    [ParseInt][parseint] function.

>     If the timestamp is omitted, request time is used in its place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the timestamp is omitted, request time is used in its place.
```

Author: Intentional indent to create a multi-paragraph list item (unless we don't like those? I don't think there's an existing rule about it in the style guide)

Reviewer: Ah, my bad. Carry on 😅
